# [...]so: undefined reference to

This blog post is more or less the story of how I encountered some issues while building an application from source which is using the openssl libary on an old linux machine. So when I was setting up the application I ran into the error "ssl libary not available" when using `./configure --prefix=/opt/`

```bash
[...]
checking for inflateEnd in -lz... yes
checking zlib.h usability... yes
checking zlib.h presence... yes
checking for zlib.h... yes
checking for inflateEnd in -lz... (cached) yes
checking zlib in /usr/local... ok
checking whether to enable https support... yes
checking for EVP_get_digestbyname in -lcrypto... yes
checking for SSL_CTX_new in -lssl... no
configure: error: not available
```

From the error message it was clear that `configure` was unable to detect my openssl libary. I knew I had installed the openssl libary, but to be sure that openssl is functionaly working I checked it by calling the binary executable.

```bash
/usr/local/ssl/bin/openssl
OpenSSL> version
OpenSSL 1.0.2r  26 Feb 2019
OpenSSL> q
```

Next I needed to set the LDFLAGS enviroment variable to give gcc and the linker a hint where to look for the shared libraries. In this scenario the /usr/local/ssl/ path is important. You can find more about this [here](https://flameeyes.blog/2010/06/20/the-why-and-how-of-rpath/)

Actual openssl and other shared libaries will display this information when you compile and install the software by yourself. They will print something like that:

```bash
If you ever happen to want to link against installed libraries 
in a given directory, LIBDIR, you must either use libtool, and 
specify the full pathname of the library, or use the '-LLIBDIR' 
flag during linking and do at least one of the following: 
   - add LIBDIR to the 'LD_LIBRARY_PATH' environment variable 
     during execution 
   - add LIBDIR to the 'LD_RUN_PATH' environment variable 
     during linking 
   - use the '-Wl,-rpath -Wl,LIBDIR' linker flag 
```

In addition, I set the LIBS flag too, which apperantly was wrong. Instead of 

`LDFLAGS="-L/usr/local/ssl/ -L/usr/local/ -L/usr/local/bin/ -Wl,-rpath,/usr/local/ssl/,-rpath,/usr/local/lib/,--export-dynamic" LIBS="-ldl" CC=/opt/gcc-4.6.0/bin/gcc CXX=/opt/gcc-4.6.0/bin/g++  ./configure --prefix=/opt/`
I later learnd, that I should have used
`LDFLAGS="-L/usr/local/ssl/ -L/usr/local/ -L/usr/local/bin/ -Wl,-rpath,/usr/local/ssl/,-rpath,/usr/local/lib/,--export-dynamic" LIBS="-ldl -lm -lrt -lssl -lcrypto" CC=/opt/gcc-4.6.0/bin/gcc CXX=/opt/gcc-4.6.0/bin/g++  ./configure --prefix=/opt/`
instead.

Calling the `configure` script with the modified parameter worked well, as the script was now able to detect that openssl is installed. The next step was to compile the whole thing with `make`.

So the first sourcefiles could be compiled without any problems, but after a few minutes it stopped with the compiler error:

```bash
libtool: link: /opt/gcc-4.6.0/bin/gcc -fvisibility=hidden -g -O2 -Wl,-rpath -Wl,/usr/local/ssl/ -Wl,-rpath -Wl,/usr/local/lib/ -Wl,--export-dynamic -o .libs/httrack httrack.o  -L/usr/local/ssl/ -L/usr/local/ -L/usr/local/bin/ -L/usr/local/lib -lpthread ./.libs/libhttrack.so -lz -ldl -Wl,-rpath -Wl,/opt/lib
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `EVP_enc_null'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `EVP_CIPHER_CTX_init'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `X509_NAME_dup'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `COMP_compress_block'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `EVP_rc2_cbc'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `X509_STORE_get_by_subject'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `EVP_VerifyFinal'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `COMP_CTX_new'
./.libs/libhttrack.so: undefined reference to `X509_STORE_CTX_set_ex_data'
```

I googled the compiler error message and as it turns out, it is related to ssl. So I suspected that the required ssl hints for the compiler didn't work out (The compiler error was caused by the incomplete LIBS flag, which I mentioned above). So the first thing I tried here, was to call the compiler command by hand. I changed the directory to the `src` folder and executed the printed command from `make` and I got the same error message. After googling I figured out that in addition I need the ssl flags as well. 

`/opt/gcc-4.6.0/bin/gcc -fvisibility=hidden -g -O2  -L/usr/local/ssl/ -L/usr/local/ -L/usr/local/bin/ -Wl,-rpath,/usr/local/ssl/,-rpath,/usr/local/lib/,--export-dynamic -L/usr/local/lib -o httrack httrack.o -lpthread libhttrack.la -lz -ldl -lm -lrt -lssl -lcrypto`

Tada! it compiled succesfully! I expected that `make` will skip my compiled file, since I already complied it by hand. But `make` overwrote my file and ran into the same issue again because it didn't use the proper flags. What you can do about this is to look for a file named `Makefile` and adjust its content so that the proper command will be generated.

The `Makefile` defined some variables and one of it is named `LIBS` with `LIBS = -lz -ldl`. So I added the missing flags with `LIBS = -lz -ldl -lm -lrt -lssl -lcrypto` and ran `make` again. Now the command printed the additonal ssl falgs and the compliation of the tool was succesful. Just one side node: the `Makefile` can occour in the source tree multiple times, so you need to be sure to adjust the correct one, where the related source file is located.

Conclusion:
[ ] make sure that the compiler and linker can find the location of the shared libaries which you need for your compilation
[ ] add the required flags for the libaries

Useful links:

- [https://flameeyes.blog/2010/06/20/the-why-and-how-of-rpath/](https://flameeyes.blog/2010/06/20/the-why-and-how-of-rpath/)
- [https://thoughtbot.com/blog/the-magic-behind-configure-make-make-install](https://thoughtbot.com/blog/the-magic-behind-configure-make-make-install)
