# Collection of common known problems and solutions in computer science

## Mathematics

### Gauss–Jordan elimination

Named after Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855). In mathematics, Gaussian elimination, also known as row reduction, is an algorithm for solving systems of linear equations. [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaussian_elimination)

### derivative

derivative can be used to calculate the slope. The derivation is a base tool to determine the maxima and minima of a function.

### Lagrange multiplier

Named after Joseph-Louis Lagrang (1736-1813). Is a method to find maxima and minima of a function.

### Taylor series

calculate approximation of a function.

### derivative equations

In mathematics, a differential equation is an equation that relates one or more functions and their derivatives. In applications, the functions generally represent physical quantities, the derivatives represent their rates of change, and the differential equation defines a relationship between the two. [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Differential_equation)

## statistics

## Arithmetic mean

average of a set of numbers.

## Varianz

For each value determine the difference from the arithmetic mean.

## Maximum likelihood estimation

We have data which are distributed by a certain classes like normal distribution, exponential distribution, poisson distribution, etc.. but we don't know the parameters of this class. So we need to estimate them. This can be achieved by the maximum likelihood estimation.

## Least squares

least squares is a regression analysis method. Find a proper function to data points.

## Algodat

### sorting

- Insertion-Sort
- Selection-Sort
- Merge-Sort
- Quicksort
- Heapsort
- binary search

### tree

- avl-tree
- b-tree
- b*-tree

### hashing

- Open hashing
- double hashing

### depth-first-search

- find all nodes from s
- graph cycle detection
- coherent (survivability)

### Dijkstra's algorithm

find shortest path

### kruskal

graph is called tree if it doesn't contain cycles. Problem find the minimal spanning tree (mst).
Kruskal 1956 algorithm solves the mst problem. [optimization]

### Prim

Prim solves mst problem too. [optimization]

### knapsack problem
combinatorial optimization [optimization]

### Eight queens puzzle
[optimization]

### CNF conjunctive normal form

statement logic in a particular expression like (a v b v c ) . (-a v -b v c)

### Disjunctive normal form

statement logic in a particular expression like (a . b . c ) v (-a . -b . c)

### Method of analytic tableaux

Use for indirect proof. [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_of_analytic_tableaux)
